---
title: 'The Icarus Project Mission, Vision & Principles (2005)'
author: Sascha & Jacks
published: 2005
---

## Our Mission

The Icarus Project envisions a new culture and language that resonates with our
actual experiences of ’mental illness’ rather than trying to fit our lives into
a conventional framework. We are a network of people living with and/or
affected by experiences that are often diagnosed and labeled as psychiatric
conditions. We believe these experiences are dangerous gifts needing cultivation
and care, rather than diseases or disorders. By joining together as individuals
and as a community, the intertwined threads of madness, creativity, and
collaboration can inspire hope and transformation in an oppressive and damaged
world. Participation in The Icarus Project helps us overcome alienation and tap
into the true potential that lies between brilliance and madness.

## Our Vision

Together, we seek new space and freedom for extreme states of consciousness. We
support alternatives to the medical model and acknowledge the traumatic legacy
of psychiatric abuse. We recognize that we all live in a crazy world, and
believe that sensitivities, visions, and inspirations are not necessarily
symptoms of illness. Sometimes breakdown can be the entrance to breakthrough. We
call for more options in understanding and treating emotional distress, and we
advocate for everyone, regardless of income, to have access to these choices.
We respect diversity and embrace harm-reduction and self-determination in
treatment decisions. Everyone is welcome, whether they support the use of
psychiatric drugs or not, and whether they identify with diagnostic categories
or not. To ensure we remain honest and untamed, we do not accept funding from
pharmaceutical companies. We invite anyone who shares the Icarus vision and
principles to join us, and choose “The Icarus Project” or any other name for the
independent efforts that inspire them.

## Our Principles

_Beyond the medical model_ While we respect whatever treatment decisions people
make, we challenge standard definitions of psychic difference as essentially
diseased, disordered, broken, faulty, and existing within the bounds of DSM-IV
diagnosis. We are exploring unknown territory and don’t steer by the default
maps outlined by docs and pharma companies. We’re making new maps.

_Educating ourselves about alternatives_ A lot of what the media, medical
establishment, and institutions tell us about “mental illness,” psych drugs, and
how we have to live our lives is just not true. We educate ourselves and each
other. We question what we hear on TV and read in doctor’s office brochures. We
explore holistic and spiritual approaches to handling our extreme states of
consciousness. We learn as much as we can about any medical treatments, and
encourage each other to make informed choices. Icarus is a sanctuary for people
thinking outside the mainstream and creating their own definitions of health and
wellness.

_Balancing wellness and action_ Icarus is a place for supporting each other in
practicing real self-care. This includes but is not limited to: making sure we
don’t neglect our personal basics like food, rest, exercise, and community;
encouraging each other to commit to the amount of work we can actually do, and
not push ourselves past our limits; and challenging ourselves to find daily
routines and projects that help us live out our dreams and have enough structure
to get by.

_Access_ We don’t need more alternatives that only rich people can afford. All
Icarus gatherings follow the policy that ’no one is turned away for lack of
funds.’ We work to create options and choices that are available to all.

_Non judgment and respect for diversity_ We welcome people who support psych
drugs and people who do not, as well as people who use diagnostic labels and
people who do not identify with those terms. We do not exclude people on the
basis of politics, lifestyle choice, diagnostic history, recreational drug use,
“criminal” behavior, or other outsider identities. We all have a lot to learn
from each other, so we respect each others’ choices. While the current social
system and medical model have the tendency to divide us, we want our
understanding of and experiences with madness to unite us.

_Non-hierarchy and anti-oppression_ Local groups need to be anti-authoritarian,
inclusive, and working against racism/classism/sexism/homophobia and other
oppressions. As a radical mental health support network, our affiliated groups
create safe and challenging spaces where oppressive behavior is not tolerated.

_Nonviolence_ We believe that we will bring about lasting change in the world
through dialogue, compassionate listening, mutual aid, and grassroots networks
of support. We hope these approaches contribute to forming viable alternatives
to the current system of government, bureaucracy, domination, and corporate
culture.

_Transparency_ We believe in public access to information about how we are
making decisions, spending money, distributing responsibility, and otherwise
delegating the work of organizing together.
